---
title : 1.3 Logistics
---

There are many components to managing logistics for field operations. The topics listed below are just a few components that we recommend all organizations and communities consider prior to starting field mapping activities. 

**Authorization from district and other officials**  

In many cases, mapping teams will need to carry an authorization letter or another form of permission from local officials to show credibility and to reduce potential conflict that could arise during the field data collection. We recommend that organizations and communities should request this letter from the appropriate authorities well ahead of planned mapping activities to reduce the risk of delay.    

**Workspace / Meeting space**  

The need and specifications for a workspace or meeting space varies from project to project. Some field mapping projects require a central base with full-day access and wi-fi whereas other field mapping projects have been operated from campsites.

**Equipment**  

Different scopes of work will require different types of equipment. For example, ODK and Kobo software can run on most Android devices, but OMK software requires high specifications. 

* What type of mobile devices will you use to collect data? (Mobile phones, tablets, GPS devices, etc.)
* Does everyone on the team have access to data collection devices? 
* Does everyone on the team have access to computers/laptops? Or will the team plan to work in shifts?

See Hardware and Software for recommended tech specifications  
(Add example equipment lists for previous projects)

**Transportation**

* How will mappers move around in the field? 
* Is the scope of work/area of interest large enough that mappers will need transportation beyond walking?
* If teams/mappers need motorized transportation,
  * What types of transportation are available?
  * What types of transportation are safe for the context and circumstances?
  * Will this type of transportation have associated costs? (i.e. driver fees, rental, fuel)

**Recruitment and compensation for mappers**  


**Management of teams in the field**

