---
title : 4.1 Designing The Data Model
bookShowToC: True
---

## Overview
When beginning a mapping project, a data model will need to be created in order to determine what features are mapped and the details collected for each of those features. A **data model** defines what features are surveyed or mapped and what attributes are collected for each feature. If a project will upload data to OpenStreetMap, the data model should be designed to match OSM tagging. 

Example data models:

- [Uganda Refugee Crisis](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/WikiProject_Uganda/Uganda_Crowdsourcing_Non-Camp_Refugee_Data)
- [Ramani Huria](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Dar_es_Salaam/Ramani_Huria)

OSM doesn’t work with layers or attribute tables, but tags. **Tags** are used in OSM to categorize features, and to add information that is useful for understanding of the map, planning, routing, and querying. Each tag consists of a key, and a value. Each map feature should have one or more tags such as:

* building=residential
* highway=primary
* amenity=school

In addition, each of these features can have an unlimited number of related attributes added into OSM as tags. For example, a building might have the following tags: 

* building=commercial
* building:material=brick
* roof:material=metal
* shop=tailor

Creating a data model should be done in collaboration with all stakeholders in order to ensure that all necessary information is collected - it is a lot more difficult to revisit a location for mapping to collect additional information.  At the same time, when designing a data model you should consider how much time it will take for a surveyor to complete data collection - every feature type, attribute, or question will add additional time needed. 

**Presentations**

* [Data models and tagging](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CU6cBtu9ZAeCWKIz6xLVN4fBrdsN7R5tFELPXbepilI/edit#slide=id.g5c7d19429e_0_225)  [1] 

**Resources**

- Check the [OpenStreetMap wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Map_Features). Start at the Map features page, search, and discover!
- Research tag use and occurence on [TagInfo](https://taginfo.openstreetmap.org/)


***

## Data model workflow
Designing a **data model** based on **OSM tagging** is typically defined by the following questions and workflow:

1. What is the focus of the data collection? Consider how the data will be used. 
1. What features do you want to collect? Identify the focus of the data collection. 
1. Where are you collecting data? Data models can differ based on their location.
1. What has been done before? Draft data model by leveraging similar models. 
1. What tags exist for features? 
   1. Verify tag status through OSM Wiki
   1. Verify tag usage through TagInfo
1. Use approved tags where possible in data model
1. Do all stakeholders agree on the data model? Review data model and incorporate feedback from project partners (adding, removing, or changing data model features can delay field data collection and decrease data quality!)


## Creating your data model 

Create a list of all of the features that you want to collect. For example: buildings, water points, roads. 

| Feature                           |
|------------------------------------------------|
|Buildings | 
|Water Points | 
|Roads | 

Go to [OpenStreetMap wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Map_Features) to search for the appropriate key for each feature, and value if there is only one value option. 

| Feature                           |  Key                           | Value                           |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------| ------------------------------------------------|
|Buildings | building |  | 
|Water Points | amenity | water_point |
|Roads | highway |  |

For features with multiple values, such as buildings, use the OSM Wiki page for that key as well as TagInfo to find appropriate values. These values should only be what is reasonable for your data collection. While it would be ideal to collect every building type in a city, your project might only be able to collect all school and hospital buildings. Note: values in your data model should make sense for the context of your geography. For example: hut is an appropriate value for buildings in Liberia, but not likely in Germany. Additionally, you may need to interpret an existing value type to best match the appropriate value for your region. 

| Feature                           |  Key                           | Value                           |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------| ------------------------------------------------|
|Buildings | building | residential, school, civic | 
|Water Points | amenity | water_point |
|Roads | highway | primary, secondary, residential |

Once you have the base tags for your features, you can decide on what attributes you want or can collect for each feature. 

| Feature                           |  Key                           | Value                           |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------| ------------------------------------------------|
|Buildings | building | residential, school, civic | 
| | building:material |  | 
| | building:levels | |
| | roof:material | |
|Water Points | amenity | water_point |
| | status |  |
|Roads | highway | primary, secondary, residential |
| | name | |
| | condition | |
| | surface | |
| | width | |

Next, values can also be determined for each attribute key. These options can be determined using the OSM Wiki and TagInfo, or in some cases can be defined by the mapper - such as for numeric answers or names.

| Feature                           |  Key                           | Value                           |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------| ------------------------------------------------|
|Buildings | building | residential, school, civic | 
| | building:material | cement_block, brick, wood, mud | 
| | building:levels | *numeric* |
| | roof:material | thatch, metal, concrete, plastic, tile |
|Water Points | amenity | water_point |
| | drinking_water | yes, no |
|Roads | highway | primary, secondary, residential |
| | name | *user defined* |
| | condition | excellent, good, poor |
| | surface | gravel, paved, dirt |
| | width | *numeric* |

Once completed with your data model, this data model should be checked by your stakeholders for any gaps. Additionally, your project plan should allow flexibility so that this data model can be adjusted with field testing and consulting your mappers. 

**Collecting private data** 
<br>
Private data should never be uploaded to OSM. However, some projects do require personal information to be collected. When this is the case, the data model can include unique non-OSM tags for private data that needs to be collected. When cleaning data following data collection, this private data can be kept in a full dataset before being removed. Once private data is removed, the dataset can be uploaded to OSM. 

***
Links <br>
1: [https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CU6cBtu9ZAeCWKIz6xLVN4fBrdsN7R5tFELPXbepilI/edit#slide=id.g5c7d19429e_0_225](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CU6cBtu9ZAeCWKIz6xLVN4fBrdsN7R5tFELPXbepilI/edit#slide=id.g5c7d19429e_0_225)

