---
title : 7.1.1 Installing QGIS
---
QGIS is a free, open source geographic information system. The program can be shared and installed offline or downloaded online.



QGIS is available for download for the following operating systems:

* Windows
* Mac OS
* Linux

**Skills and Technology Needed**

* Computer with sufficient free disk space (approx 10GB) and administrator rights to install software
* Recommended: computer mouse


**For Windows**

Prior to installation, you need to determine whether or not your computer runs on a 32-bit or 64-bit system. <br>
1. Open the Start Menu, right-click on “Computer”, and select “Properties”. 
2. Under “System”, the correct system type will be listed. 

**Installing from Shared File**

If you are offline, you will need to install QGIS from a shared file. The QGIS Installer can be downloaded and shared via USB. This file can be shared with colleagues and others who wish to install the program. 
<br><br>
To install from a shared file:<br>
1. Go to folder shared to you and downloaded to your computer.
2. Select the appropriate installer folder based on your operating system (Windows 32-bit; Windows 64-bit; or Mac). 
3. Open the installer to begin the installation process. 



**Installing from QGIS Website**
<br>[image]


If you did not receive an offline installer, you will need to install from the QGIS website. Additionally, it is highly recommended to download software directly from the QGIS website whenever possible. This ensures that you have the most up-to-date version of the program. The QGIS file is larger than 300MB and may take a long time to download, depending on your internet connection. 

To install:
1. Visit: [http://www.qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html](http://www.qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html) 
2. Select your appropriate operating system (i.e. Windows, Mac, Linux). 
    1. For Windows - select your appropriate system (32-bit or 64-bit). 
3. Click on the QGIS Standalone Installer to begin the download process. 
4. Once installed, open the installer to begin the installation process. 





**Resources**



Further QGIS Install instructions: https://docs.qgis.org/testing/en/docs/user_manual/introduction/getting_started.html#installing-qgis 

**Considerations when installing QGIS for large numbers of individuals**

* Consider internet connectivity and capacity prior to installing QGIS for large numbers of individuals via internet. It is highly recommended that prior to the training/workshop, installation files are downloaded and loaded onto USB drives for offline installation. 
* When downloading offline installers for a large group, make sure to download an installer for all operating systems. Note: it will be important to download the Windows installer for BOTH 32-bit and 64-bit. 
* The downlaod and installation process often takes longer than anticipated, especially when factoring in technical skills and hardware compatibility. Therefore, it is recommended to begin download and installation process early in the training or during breaks to ensure a smooth process and adherance to agenda. 
* Prior to the training/workshop, request attendees to make sure that they have enough space on their computers (10GB+) for installation of QGIS. 






