---
title : 6.1 HOT Export Tool
---

[HOT Export Tool](https://export.hotosm.org/en/v3/) allows users to download OSM data by specifying tags, area of interest, and file type. Learning resources and walkthroughs can be found at the [HOT Export Tool Learn page](https://export.hotosm.org/en/v3/learn).

Tools and Technology Needed:

* Computer
* Internet Connection
* [OSM Account](https://hotosm.github.io/toolbox/pages/core-technology/2.1.1-opening-osm-accounts/)

## Training Activity
**Presentation:** <br>
**Estimated time:** <br>

In this activity, you will practice using the HOT Export Tool for downloading OSM data for use in QGIS. The HOT Export Tool is an online-based tool, so you will need to be patient with internet connectivity. 

To get started, open an internet browser and go to: [https://export.hotosm.org/](https://export.hotosm.org/en/v3/) 

To use the HOT Export Tool, you will need to log in using your OSM username and password, by clicking the red “Log In” button in the top right-hand corner. After logging in, click on ‘Create’. 

**Practice**



*   On the map to the right, zoom in and find a location of your choice (i.e. Zwedru, Accra). 
*   Once you have zoomed in to your area of interest, select the box tool from the Tools Menu on the right. 
*   Click one corner to start drawing a box, then select the opposite corner to complete the box. This is your AREA OF INTEREST that will be downloaded. 
*   On the left side of the window, fill out the “1 Describe” options:
    *   Name: “[YOUR OSM USERNAME] Test Export”
        *   For example, “jessbeutler Test Export”
    *   Description (optional)
    *   Project (optional)
        *   For example, “Government Inclusion Project”
    *   Click ‘Next’
*   Fill out the “2 Formats” options:
    *   Select File Format: Shapefile (.shp)
    *   Click ‘Next’
*   Fill out the “3 Data” options: 
    *   Select ‘Education’
    *   Select ‘Government’
    *   Select ‘Healthcare’
    *   Click ‘Next’
*   Fill out the “4 Data” options:
    *   Deselect ‘Publish this Export’
    *   Click ‘Create Export’

_This process will take several minutes to process._

*   When the export process is completed, the ‘Status’ bar will be updated to ‘COMPLETED’
*   Download the shapefile by clicking on the shapefile link, as highlighted above. 
*   Open the downloaded .zip folder and save it to a folder of your choice on your computer.
*   You can now use the shapefile in a GIS software such as QGIS.
